README.md, before:

# source-configs

[![Build Status](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/source-configs/workflows/CI/badge.svg
)](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/source-configs/actions?query=workflow%3ACI) [![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/rooseveltframework/source-configs/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/rooseveltframework/source-configs) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/source-configs.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/source-configs)

A Node.js module that harvests app-level config values from command line arguments, environment variables, or config files based on a config schema you define within your app. This module was built and is maintained by the [Roosevelt web framework](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/roosevelt) [team](https://github.com/orgs/rooseveltframework/people), but it can be used independently of Roosevelt as well.

By default configs matching a given schema are sourced from the following locations in the following order of precedence:

- Command line argument set in the schema via `commandLineArg`.
- Environment variable set in the schema via `envVar`.
- Deployment config file declared via:
  - Command line argument: `--deploy-config-file` or `--df`.
  - Environment variable: `DEPLOY_CONFIG`.
  - package.json as a `deployConfig` field.
- Default defined in the schema.

## Usage

First declare `source-configs` as a dependency in your app.

Then create a config schema JSON object to tell `source-configs` what config values to listen for.

Here's a simple example declaring that our application will use a WebSocket with a configurable host, port, and protocol:

```js
// your-schema-js-file.json
{
  websocket: {
    host: {},
    port: {},
    protocol: {}
  }
}
```

### Schema metadata

Schemas support the following metadata for each configurable property in order to create constraints if desired or add additional functionality:

- `description` *[String]*: Describe what this config will be used for.
- `default` *[any]*: Set a default value for this config. If not set, the default is null.
- `values` *[Array]*: Enumerated list of values that are valid. If not set, any value will be valid.
- `commandLineArg` *[String|Array<String>]*: Command line argument(s) to listen for that will set this config. If not set, source-configs will not listen for command line arguments to set the value for this config.
- `envVar` *[String|Array<String>]*: Environment variable(s) to listen for that will set this config. If not set, source-configs will not listen for an environment variable to set the value for this config.

### User Defined Functions

Additionally, a schema can be a function which has the parent config passed to it as the first argument. To do this create a key/value pair within the schema object:
 - If the schema is stored in a `.js` file, set the key as the desired function name and the value as the function.
 - If using a `.json` file to store the schema, set the key as the desired function name and the value as `'user defined function'`. Once the `.json` file is required in, override the key's value with the desired function.

Below is a more complex WebSocket config example leveraging all of the above metadata options:

```js
// your-schema-js-file.json
{
  websocket: {
    host: {
      description: 'WebSocket host URL',
      default: 'localhost',
      commandLineArg: ['--websocket-host-url', '--ws-host', '-h'],
      envVar: ['WEBSOCKET_HOST_URL', 'WS_HOST']
    },
    port: {
      description: 'WebSocket port',
      default: 8081,
      commandLineArg: ['--ws-port', '-p'],
      envVar: 'WS_PORT'
    },
    protocol: {
      description: 'Which WebSocket protocol',
      values: ['ws', 'wss'],
      commandLineArg: '--ws-protocol',
      envVar: 'WS_PROTOCOL'
    },
    url: 'user defined function'
  }
}
```

### Use in your app

Here's an example usage of source-configs using the schema defined above:

```javascript
const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')
schema.websocket.url = function (config) {
  return config.protocol + '://' + config.host + ':' + config.port
}
const config = sourceConfigs(schema)

// access one of the configs
console.log(config.websocket.port)
```

### Custom configuration

In addition to the above instantiation method, source-configs also accepts an optional configuration object that can be passed to the constructor as a second object like so:

```javascript
const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')

const config = sourceConfigs(schema, {
  logging: true,
  sources: [
    'command line',
    'environment variable',
    'deploy config',
    { custom: 'object' }
  ]
})
```

#### Available parameters

- `logging`: Whether or not source-configs will log to console.

  - Default: *[Boolean]* `true`.

- `sources`: An array of sources that can be a mix of built-in sources and custom source objects in order of priority.
  - Default *[Array]*:

    ```javascript
      'command line',
      'environment variable',
      'deploy config'
    ```

    - Note: built-in sources can also be referenced in multiple ways:

      - Command line: `command line` or `commandLineArg`.
      - Environment variable: `environment variable` or `envVar`
      - Deploy config: `deploy config` or `deployConfig`

  - You can also add custom sources this way by supplying an object to this array:

    ```javascript
      'command line',
      'environment variable',
      { custom: 'object' }
    ```

    - In this example `deploy config` is ommitted from the list of sources and a custom object is the last item to source from before defaults.

- `transform`: A function that can be used to mutate your config after it has been parsed and sourced but before it gets returned by source-configs.

  - Example:

    ```javascript
    const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
    const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')

    const config = sourceConfigs(schema, {
      transform: (config, commandLineArgs) => {
        // check for a cli flag that wouldn't normally translate into a config
        if (commandLineArgs.switchPort === true) {
          config.websocket.port = 43711
        }

        // return the config when done
        return config
      }
    })

    // access that config configs
    console.log(config.websocket.port)
    //=> 43711
    ```

  - API:

    - `transform(config, commandLineArgs)`: Config transform method.
      - `config`: The config after being parsed by source-configs.
      - `commandLineArgs`: CLI flags as parsed by [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser).

### Properties of source-configs module

In addition to its constructor, source-configs exposes the following properties:

- `configs` *[Object]*: The resulting configs after running source-config's constructor.
- `commandLineArgs` *[Array]*: All command line arguments passed to your application, including those not listened for by your schema. Powered by [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser).
- `yargsParser` *[Function]*: The instance of [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser) that source-configs used to compile all command line arguments passed to your application.
- `printHelp` *[Function]*: A function which will generate a help menu describing the command line arguments defined in the schema.

Commit message:

0.3.5
- Added a function to make it easy for developers to add a `-h` or `--help` command to their applications that will print a summary of supported command line options.
- Dropped support for Node 12 and below.
- Various dependencies updated.

README.md, after:

# source-configs

[![Build Status](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/source-configs/workflows/CI/badge.svg
)](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/source-configs/actions?query=workflow%3ACI) [![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/rooseveltframework/source-configs/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/rooseveltframework/source-configs) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/source-configs.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/source-configs)

A Node.js module that harvests app-level config values from command line arguments, environment variables, or config files based on a config schema you define within your app. This module was built and is maintained by the [Roosevelt web framework](https://github.com/rooseveltframework/roosevelt) [team](https://github.com/orgs/rooseveltframework/people), but it can be used independently of Roosevelt as well.

By default configs matching a given schema are sourced from the following locations in the following order of precedence:

- Command line argument set in the schema via `commandLineArg`.
- Environment variable set in the schema via `envVar`.
- Deployment config file declared via:
  - Command line argument: `--deploy-config-file` or `--df`.
  - Environment variable: `DEPLOY_CONFIG`.
  - package.json as a `deployConfig` field.
- Default defined in the schema.

## Usage

First declare `source-configs` as a dependency in your app.

Then create a config schema JSON object to tell `source-configs` what config values to listen for.

Here's a simple example declaring that our application will use a WebSocket with a configurable host, port, and protocol:

```js
// your-schema-js-file.json
{
  websocket: {
    host: {},
    port: {},
    protocol: {}
  }
}
```

### Schema metadata

Schemas support the following metadata for each configurable property in order to create constraints if desired or add additional functionality:

- `description` *[String]*: Describe what this config will be used for.
- `default` *[any]*: Set a default value for this config. If not set, the default is null.
- `values` *[Array]*: Enumerated list of values that are valid. If not set, any value will be valid.
- `commandLineArg` *[String|Array<String>]*: Command line argument(s) to listen for that will set this config. If not set, source-configs will not listen for command line arguments to set the value for this config.
- `envVar` *[String|Array<String>]*: Environment variable(s) to listen for that will set this config. If not set, source-configs will not listen for an environment variable to set the value for this config.

### User-defined functions

Additionally, a schema can be a function which has the parent config passed to it as the first argument. To do this create a key/value pair within the schema object:
 - If the schema is stored in a `.js` file, set the key as the desired function name and the value as the function.
 - If using a `.json` file to store the schema, set the key as the desired function name and the value as `'user defined function'`. Once the `.json` file is required in, override the key's value with the desired function.

Below is a more complex WebSocket config example leveraging all of the above metadata options:

```js
// your-schema-js-file.json
{
  websocket: {
    host: {
      description: 'WebSocket host URL',
      default: 'localhost',
      commandLineArg: ['--websocket-host-url', '--ws-host', '-h'],
      envVar: ['WEBSOCKET_HOST_URL', 'WS_HOST']
    },
    port: {
      description: 'WebSocket port',
      default: 8081,
      commandLineArg: ['--ws-port', '-p'],
      envVar: 'WS_PORT'
    },
    protocol: {
      description: 'Which WebSocket protocol',
      values: ['ws', 'wss'],
      commandLineArg: '--ws-protocol',
      envVar: 'WS_PROTOCOL'
    },
    url: 'user defined function'
  }
}
```

### Use in your app

Here's an example usage of source-configs using the schema defined above:

```javascript
const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')
schema.websocket.url = function (config) {
  return config.protocol + '://' + config.host + ':' + config.port
}
const config = sourceConfigs(schema)

// access one of the configs
console.log(config.websocket.port)
```

### Custom configuration

In addition to the above instantiation method, source-configs also accepts an optional configuration object that can be passed to the constructor as a second object like so:

```javascript
const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')

const config = sourceConfigs(schema, {
  logging: true,
  sources: [
    'command line',
    'environment variable',
    'deploy config',
    { custom: 'object' }
  ]
})
```

#### Available parameters

- `logging`: Whether or not source-configs will log to console.

  - Default: *[Boolean]* `true`.

- `sources`: An array of sources that can be a mix of built-in sources and custom source objects in order of priority.
  - Default *[Array]*:

    ```javascript
      'command line',
      'environment variable',
      'deploy config'
    ```

    - Note: built-in sources can also be referenced in multiple ways:

      - Command line: `command line` or `commandLineArg`.
      - Environment variable: `environment variable` or `envVar`
      - Deploy config: `deploy config` or `deployConfig`

  - You can also add custom sources this way by supplying an object to this array:

    ```javascript
      'command line',
      'environment variable',
      { custom: 'object' }
    ```

    - In this example `deploy config` is ommitted from the list of sources and a custom object is the last item to source from before defaults.

- `transform`: A function that can be used to mutate your config after it has been parsed and sourced but before it gets returned by source-configs.

  - Example:

    ```javascript
    const sourceConfigs = require('source-configs')
    const schema = require('./your-schema-js-file.json')

    const config = sourceConfigs(schema, {
      transform: (config, commandLineArgs) => {
        // check for a cli flag that wouldn't normally translate into a config
        if (commandLineArgs.switchPort === true) {
          config.websocket.port = 43711
        }

        // return the config when done
        return config
      }
    })

    // access that config configs
    console.log(config.websocket.port)
    //=> 43711
    ```

  - API:

    - `transform(config, commandLineArgs)`: Config transform method.
      - `config`: The config after being parsed by source-configs.
      - `commandLineArgs`: CLI flags as parsed by [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser).

### Properties of source-configs module

In addition to its constructor, source-configs exposes the following properties:

- `configs` *[Object]*: The resulting configs after running source-config's constructor.
- `commandLineArgs` *[Array]*: All command line arguments passed to your application, including those not listened for by your schema. Powered by [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser).
- `yargsParser` *[Function]*: The instance of [yargs-parser](https://www.npmjs.com/package/yargs-parser) that source-configs used to compile all command line arguments passed to your application.
- `printHelp` *[Function]*: A function which will generate a help menu describing the command line arguments defined in the schema. Useful for if you want to define a `-h` or `--help` command line argument to print all available supported command line arguments. Just print call `console.log(config.printHelp())` to print that information to your users.
